> It’s difficult to make predictions, especially about the future  
-- attributed [to various sources](https://quoteinvestigator.com/2013/10/20/no-predict/) 

> intelligence community does what it calls intelligence analysis—the methodical examination of the information collected by spies and surveillance to figure out what it means, and what will happen next.  
The key word in Kent’s work is estimate. As Kent wrote, “estimating is what you do when you do not know.” And as Kent emphasized over and over, we never truly know what will happen next. Hence forecasting is all about estimating the likelihood of something happening, which Kent and his colleagues did for many years at the Office of National Estimates—an obscure but extraordinarily influential bureau whose job was to draw on all information available to the CIA, synthesize it, and forecast anything and everything that might help the top officeholders in the US government decide what to do next.  
-- Watson’s chief engineer, David Ferrucci  
I was sure that Watson could easily field a question about the present or past like “Which two Russian leaders traded jobs in the last ten years?” But I was curious about his views on how long it will take for Watson or one of its digital descendants to field questions like “Will two top Russian leaders trade jobs in the next ten years?” In 1965 the polymath Herbert Simon thought we were only twenty years away from a world in which machines could do “any work a man can do,” which is the sort of naively optimistic thing people said back then, and one reason why Ferrucci — who has worked in artificial intelligence for thirty years — is more cautious today. Computing is making enormous strides, Ferrucci noted. The ability to spot patterns is growing spectacularly.
And machine learning, in combination with burgeoning human-machine interactions that feed the learning process, promises far more fundamental advances to come. “It’s going to be one of these exponential curves that we’re kind of at the bottom of now,” Ferrucci said.  
But there is a vast difference between “Which two Russian leaders traded jobs?” and “Will two Russian leaders trade jobs again?” The former is a historical fact. The computer can look it up. The latter requires the computer to make an informed guess about the intentions of Vladimir Putin, the character of Dmitri Medvedev, and the causal dynamics of Russian politics, and then integrate that information into a judgment call. People do that sort of thing all the time, but that doesn’t make it easy. It means the human brain is wondrous—because the task is staggeringly hard. Even with computers making galloping advances, the sort of forecasting that superforecasters do is a long way off. And Ferrucci isn’t sure we will ever see a human under glass at the Smithsonian with a sign saying “subjective judgment.” Machines may get better at “mimicking human meaning,” and thereby better at predicting human behavior, but “there’s a difference between mimicking and reflecting meaning and originating meaning,” Ferrucci said. That’s a space human judgment will always occupy.  
In forecasting, as in other fields, we will continue to see human judgment being displaced—to the consternation of white-collar workers—but we will also see more and more syntheses, like “freestyle chess,” in which humans with computers compete as teams, the human drawing on the computer’s indisputable strengths but also occasionally overriding the computer. The result is a combination that can (sometimes) beat both humans and machines. To reframe the man-versus-machine dichotomy, combinations of Garry Kasparov and Deep Blue may prove more robust than pure-human or puremachine approaches.  
What Ferrucci does see becoming obsolete is the guru model that makes so many policy debates so puerile: “I’ll counter your Paul Krugman polemic with my Niall Ferguson counterpolemic, and rebut your Tom Friedman op-ed with my Bret Stephens blog.” Ferrucci sees light at the end of this long dark tunnel: “I think it’s going to get stranger and stranger” for people to listen to the advice of experts whose views are informed only by their subjective judgment. Human thought is beset by psychological pitfalls, a fact that has only become widely recognized in the last decade or two. “So what I want is that human expert paired with a computer to overcome the human cognitive limitations and biases.” If Ferrucci is right — I suspect he is — we will need to blend computer-based forecasting and subjective judgment in the future. So it’s time we got serious about both.  
....  
> [Universe] an awesomely big and complicated clock but still a clock—and the more scientists learned about its innards, how the gears grind together, how the weights and springs function, the better they could capture its operations with deterministic equations and predict what it would do. In 1814 the French mathematician and astronomer Pierre Simon Laplace took this dream to its logical extreme:
We may regard the present state of the universe as the effect of its past and the cause of its future. An intellect which at a certain moment would know all forces that set nature in motion, and all positions of all items of which nature is composed, if this intellect were also vast enough to submit these data to analysis, it would embrace in a single formula the movements of the greatest bodies of the universe and those of the tiniest atom; for such an intellect nothing would be uncertain and the future just like the past would be present before its eyes.  
Laplace called his imaginary entity a “demon.” If it knew everything about the present, Laplace thought, it could predict everything about the future. It would be omniscient. Lorenz poured cold rainwater on that dream. If the clock symbolizes perfect Laplacean predictability, its opposite is the Lorentzian cloud. High school science tells us that clouds form when water vapor coalesces around dust particles. This sounds simple but exactly how a particular cloud develops—the shape it takes—depends on complex feedback interactions among droplets. To capture these interactions, computer modelers need equations that are highly sensitive to tiny butterfly-effect errors in data collection. So even if we learn all that is knowable about how clouds form, we will not be able to predict the shape a particular cloud will take. We can only wait and see. In one of history’s great ironies, scientists today know vastly more than their colleagues a century ago, and possess vastly more data-crunching power, but they are much less confident in the prospects for perfect predictability.  
This is a big reason for the “skeptic” half of my “optimistic skeptic” stance. We live in a world where the actions of one nearly powerless man can have ripple effects around the world—ripples that affect us all to varying degrees.  
> In 1972 the American meteorologist Edward Lorenz wrote a paper with an arresting title: “Predictability: Does the Flap of a Butterfly’s Wings in Brazil Set Off a Tornado in Texas?” A decade earlier, Lorenz had discovered by accident that tiny data entry variations in computer simulations of weather patterns—like replacing 0.506127 with 0.506—could produce dramatically different long-term forecasts. It was an insight that would inspire “chaos theory”: in nonlinear systems like the atmosphere, even small changes in initial conditions can mushroom to enormous proportions. So, in principle, a lone butterfly in Brazil could flap its wings and set off a tornado in Texas—even though swarms of other Brazilian butterflies could flap frantically their whole lives and never cause a noticeable gust a few miles away. Of course Lorenz didn’t mean that the butterfly “causes” the tornado in the same sense that I cause a wineglass to break when I hit it with a hammer.  
He meant that if that particular butterfly hadn’t flapped its wings at that moment, the unfathomably complex network of atmospheric actions and reactions would have behaved differently, and the tornado might never have formed—just as the Arab Spring might never have happened, at least not when and as it did, if the police had just let Mohamed Bouazizi sell his fruits and vegetables that morning in 2010.  
Edward Lorenz shifted scientific opinion toward the view that there are hard limits on predictability, a deeply philosophical question. For centuries, scientists had supposed that growing knowledge must lead to greater predictability because reality was like a clock.  
-- Superforecasting: The Art and Science of Prediction by Philip Tetlock  

